Why Is Programming So Difficult To Learn?

Programming is often seen as an extremely difficult task and therefore people think only the extremely clever can undertake it. This is a common misconception for some, as it can be achieved with perseverance, but many still use it as an excuse for their unwillingness to learn. However this does not mean that programming is a simple feat, because there are many hurdles which you have to cross. Through personal experience I have found some areas that need to be conquered before you want to become a successful programmer; patience, an eye for detail, and logical thinking.

Patience is a personal characteristic that is not exercised to its fullest, so when beginning to program it can seem very difficult. It takes time to understand difficult concepts, so you need to give up time in order to learn: consequently if you do not understand something then frustration can take over, it turn, impeding your learning. Being able to control frustration and be patient is a very challenging skill yet is compulsory in the world of programming.

The computer itself is not smart, but it is you who controls what it does. Because of this, the language used by the computer has to be very accurate, and when only one term is incorrect the computer will respond with 'Syntax error'. For a first time programmer this can be a difficult concept to master, and can escalate into anger quite quickly. Having this eye for detail is also a necessary skill that links in with memory; memorising these syntax can be annoying but being able to do it improves your eye for detail.

Computing is a completely different mindset from everyday life, because computers work in a very different way. People may think that this mindset is completely unnecessary and therefore hesitate to learn programming, but this skill is still completely necessary as we cannot teach computers to think like us. This, however, does not mean that it is an easy mindset to learn. Understanding how a computer thinks is needed for learning how to write an effective program. The consequences of not knowing can be irritating as, your programs will then not follow the correct structure and may not even run correctly.

These are just a few problems that have affected me personally, but they can be overcome. The key factor that needs to be applied is time; it comes along with patience, it is needed to notice the key detail, and changing mindsets also takes a long time. Therefore one way in which you can make programming easier for yourself is to give yourself time. However a common hindrance for early programmers is frustration; if things do not go as expected then  anger can affect you and make programming an even more difficult task an in turn discourage you from trying. Overall, patience, an eye for detail, and logicality are all needed and are all linked to frustration. When frustration is controlled then programming will not be as difficult as first perceived.
